P5 Priority fees page (TW-740) (#3236)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/launch-arbitrum-chain/02-configure-your-chain/common/gas/priority-fees.mdx

---
title: 'Priority fees collection'
sidebar_label: 'Priority fees'
description: "How to enable priority-fee (tip) collection on an Arbitrum chain in ArbOS61 'Elara', and the additional requirements for tip-based transaction ordering."
content_type: concept
author: 'gaelblanchemain'
sme: 'vbridge-hash'
---

> ArbOS61 ("Elara") introduces the **capability** for chain owners to collect priority fees (tips) on their Arbitrum chain. The feature ships disabled, and a chain owner can enable it through a deliberate, two-step action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ArbOS61 ("Elara") introduces the capability for chain owners to collect priority fees (tips) on their Arbitrum chain. The feature ships disabled, and a chain owner can enable it through a deliberate, two-step action.
```

<VanillaAdmonition type="caution" title="Activation requires a separate Constitutional vote">

> For Arbitrum One and Nova, enabling this feature requires a **Constitutional DAO vote**—it isn't activated as part of the ArbOS61 upgrade itself. The upgrade only makes tip collection _possible_ for chains that opt in.

Reviewer 2: This feature is only available on Arbitrum One, as per the Nova minimization plan.

> For Arbitrum One and Nova, enabling this feature requires an **additional Constitutional DAO vote** — it isn't activated as part of the ArbOS61 upgrade itself. The upgrade only makes tip collection *possible* for chains that opt in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Arbitrum One and Nova, enabling this feature requires a **Constitutional DAO vote**—it isn't activated as part of the ArbOS61 upgrade itself. The upgrade only makes tip collection *possible* for chains that opt in.
```

</VanillaAdmonition>

## How to enable tip collection

The chain owner calls the [`ArbOwner` precompile](/build-decentralized-apps/precompiles/02-reference.mdx#arbowner) at `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000070`:

```solidity
// Enable tip collection
IArbOwner(address(0x70)).setCollectTips(true);

// Disable it again
IArbOwner(address(0x70)).setCollectTips(false);

// Read the current state
bool collecting = IArbOwner(address(0x70)).getCollectTips();
```

> `ArbOwner` is access-controlled — only the chain owner (typically the DAO or a designated operator address) can call these methods. The implementation is in [`precompiles/ArbOwner.go`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/6dce8d13902649a1acdfd3f2504129f1f5612358/precompiles/ArbOwner.go#L666).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ArbOwner` is access-controlled—only the chain owner (typically a designated operator address or DAO) can call these methods. The implementation is in [`precompiles/ArbOwner.go`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/6dce8d13902649a1acdfd3f2504129f1f5612358/precompiles/ArbOwner.go#L666).
```

## How tips are collected

> Once enabled, any `priorityFee` (EIP-1559 `maxPriorityFeePerGas`) included in a transaction is collected the same way all other gas fees are, and routed into an onchain account. No separate infrastructure is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once enabled, any `priorityFee` (EIP-1559 `maxPriorityFeePerGas`) included in a transaction is collected the same way all other gas fees are, and routed into an onchain account. No separate infrastructure or modifications are needed.
```

## Activation and receipt timing

> If tip-paying transactions land in the same block but **before** the transaction that enables fee collection, tips aren't collected from those earlier transactions — but their receipts will report tips as if they were. This is a known issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If tip-paying transactions land in the same block but *before* the transaction that enables fee collection, tips aren't collected from those earlier transactions—but their receipts will report tips as if they were. This is a known issue.
```

To avoid it, the chain owner can either:

- enable tip collection inside a delayed transaction, or
- ensure the enabling transaction is the first (or only) transaction in its block.

## Tip-based transaction ordering

Enabling collection alone does **not** change how transactions are ordered. For priority fees to actually influence sequencing, the chain needs **both**:

> 1. **`setCollectTips(true)`** — activates fee collection via `ArbOwner`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **`setCollectTips(true)`**: activates fee collection via `ArbOwner`.
```

> 2. **Updated sequencer logic** — the sequencer must be configured to read the `PriorityFee` field when sorting transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Updated sequencer logic**: the sequencer must be configured to read the `PriorityFee` field when sorting transactions.
```

> Without Step 2, the sequencer continues to use its existing ordering rules (such as [Timeboost](/how-arbitrum-works/timeboost/gentle-introduction.mdx), if enabled) regardless of the transaction's priority fee.

Reviewer 2: such as Timeboost or First Come First Served

> Without step 2, the sequencer continues to use its existing ordering rules (such as [Timeboost](/how-arbitrum-works/timeboost/gentle-introduction.mdx)) regardless of the priority fee attached to a transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without Step 2, the sequencer continues to use its existing ordering rules (such as [Timeboost](/how-arbitrum-works/timeboost/gentle-introduction.mdx), if enabled) regardless of the transaction's priority fee.
```
